Responsible Artificial Intelligence for a Smart Economy
(RAISE): Leading Trustworthy Innovation Globally
Key Information
Start and End Date
Start Date
15/12/2025
End Date
30/04/2026

Total Funding Requested
Contracting Term
Total

GST Excl. Amount
$250,000.00

GST Amount

GST Incl. Amount

$37,500.00

$287,500.00

Contact Details
Role

Name

Organisation

Email address

Phone number

Contract Administrator

Lai Ching Tan

The Research Trust of Victoria University of Wellington

l*****@vuw.ac.nz

021 217 1824

Application Administrator

Hayden Thorne

The Research Trust of Victoria University of Wellington

h*****@vuw.ac.nz

0273058645

Eligibility
Question
Does your application meet these criteria?

Answer(yes/no)
Yes

If you answered no, and would like to add any details:

Public Statement
Responsible Artificial Intelligence for a Smart Economy (RAISE) will position New Zealand at the forefront of shaping trustworthy and safe AI for
everyone. This initiative takes an interdisciplinary approach to bring together top academics, industry experts, and Māori innovation networks in
developing new AI technologies that are transparent, explainable, and operate in ways people can understand. RAISE is guided by New Zealand’s
reputation for integrity, upholding human rights, and demonstrating transparency, with a vision to ensure AI is built and used with our highest
values in mind.
RAISE’s research will develop real-world AI tools that help organisations deliver smart and safe solutions, positioning New Zealand as a global
leader in trustworthy innovation. Impact ranges from expert technical research to the development of AI guidelines and regulatory frameworks
that provide appropriate safeguards for the productive innovation and adoption of AI. There is global demand for safe and trustworthy AI; RAISE
will deliver this research and translate it into commercial outputs. By developing the next generation of AI talent, enhancing public science
communication, and building industry and international partnerships, RAISE will ensure that AI grows New Zealand’s high-tech economy while
protecting our communities.
Contact: Dr Andrew Lensen (andrew.lensen@vuw.ac.nz)

Executive Summary
Responsible Artificial Intelligence for a Smart Economy (RAISE) will position New Zealand as a global leader in responsible AI, building on our
trusted reputation for integrity, human rights, and transparency. Our vision delivers world-class research and solutions with enduring benefits for
Aotearoa’s economy and society, grounded in integrity, equity, and Kiwi values.
RAISE will create value across three pillars:
1. Conducting research to develop trustworthy technology, supporting organisations to deploy AI responsibly.
2. Shaping fit-for-purpose AI governance and regulatory frameworks aligning with international best practices.
3. Building responsible AI systems with industry and the public sector in high-value, high-impact areas.

Appropriate use of AI offers significant economic and other benefits. However, AI innovation and adoption are hampered by a lack of trust.
Multiple recent surveys have shown over half of New Zealanders are very concerned about the negative impacts of AI. Building trust demands
more than technical sophistication: it requires a holistic approach, embedding transparency and explainability, underpinned by regulatory and
governance structures that unleash responsible innovation.
The global market for responsible and explainable AI is expanding rapidly. Recent estimates project the explainable AI market alone will exceed
US$20 billion by 2030, reflecting demand in sectors such as healthcare, finance, and government.
Investment into RAISE will create new collaborations, attract top talent, and deliver research and capability that existing initiatives alone cannot.
RAISE will position New Zealand as a global influencer in AI policy and practice, through our interdisciplinary approach spanning academia,
industry, government, and Māori innovation networks.

Performance Area
Concept Outline
Our Vision
AI could add $76b to New Zealand’s GDP by 2038, powering our future high-tech economy. However, research has shown that these productivity
gains are undermined by unreliable outputs, biased decisions, and safety concerns. To realise these economic benefits, we need trustworthy AI,
giving consumers and businesses the confidence to engage.
Our vision is to establish NZ as a global leader in responsible AI (RAI) innovation and deployment, where safety, integrity, and reliability drive our
competitive edge. This proposal directly addresses NZ's low public trust in AI, recasting it as a market asset and a cultural strength with export
appeal. Responsible, NZ-designed AI will be synonymous with verifiable safety and ethical value, creating a sought-after model for trustworthy
technology worldwide. Research shows that the biggest gains are realised by companies that invest in adopting AI responsibly, with RAI
generating a financial premium.
By focusing on trustworthy AI, the Responsible Artificial Intelligence for a Smart Economy (RAISE) platform will enable innovation and counter the
primary barriers to adoption: regulatory uncertainty, and perceived ethics and risk. Appropriate regulation can promote, rather than inhibit,
innovation by providing certainty on boundaries, spurring the development of solutions with confidence. Trust, along with Motivation, Access,
and Skills (MAST), is key to realising The Digital Strategy for Aotearoa, necessary for enabling public adoption. A focus on “trust by design” will be
a key competitive advantage, enabling our exports to thrive in international markets with complex regulatory environments. This will attract
international investment, open new markets, and support the government's strategic focus on being a "smart adopter" of AI.
RAISE will serve as the national "centre of gravity" for AI research, policy, and commercialisation. It will formalise and empower national and
international experts to work with industry and government, translating international principles (like those from the OECD and UNESCO) into
practical, innovation-friendly frameworks. It will foster world-class research to develop practical tools for AI governance, and serve as a trusted
advisor and public voice, building the capability required for wide-scale, beneficial AI adoption. RAISE will develop internal commercialisation
capability to move successful research into real-world products and services. The team has a diverse range of existing RAI projects that will be
combined and rapidly scaled up for fast impact and a rapid return on investment.
The key goal of RAISE’s research will be to develop locally-appropriate and world-leading solutions to achieve end-to-end responsibility,
encompassing both transparency (of systems) and accountability (of humans and organisations). This work is inherently interdisciplinary, and
must be delivered locally for it to be useful in NZ, considering the local economic, industrial, and cultural contexts.

Excellence
RAISE’s research will be built on three pillars:
1. Trustworthy Technology: developing technical advancements in transparency, robustness, explainability, security, and safety.
2. Trustworthy Frameworks: establishing thought leadership in accountability, ethics, human rights, governance, and regulation.
3. Trustworthy Systems: building infrastructure and solutions collaboratively with industry and the public sector to demonstrate the efficacy and
value of responsible AI systems, through initiatives like the applied doctorates scheme, subsidised consulting for SMEs, and incubating ideas into
spin-out companies.
These pillars are designed so that the application-driven research in the Technology and Frameworks pillars (TRL 2-4) can be put into practice
through the Systems pillar (TRL 5-7). Illustrative examples of potential projects that build on the team’s expertise include:
• Developing novel methods for explainable and verifiable AI to achieve transparency in medical AI diagnostic tools and decision support systems
to enhance patient trust
• Building a sovereign large language model (LLM) with Catalyst Cloud, Public AI Network, and Metagov, supporting responsible use of GenAI in
NZ
• Partnering Vision Mātauranga in an AI context to develop tools grounded in te ao Māori and create high-value Indigenous economic
opportunities
• Testing privacy-preserving environmental monitoring to balance transparency with personal and community privacy rights
• Building targeted genAI models for specific legal and commercial applications to mitigate the likelihood of hallucination
• Embedding complex ethical and legal norms into agentic AI and other automated systems for delivering public services

This consortium brings together NZ’s leading minds across disciplines essential for an RAI ecosystem: computer science, engineering, law, ethics,
human rights, Mātauranga Māori, and the social and cognitive sciences. Investment into RAISE will bridge disciplinary boundaries and cohere this
world-class capability into a strategic national asset, delivering the "additionality" sought by the Call.
The founding team includes a mixture of senior, mid-career, and early-career academics from six NZ universities, alongside industry partners. It
includes extensive experience in science leadership, including Heads of School/Department, and Principal Investigators who have collectively
managed $10m+ in research grants. Several members have private sector experience, including in the commercialisation of deep tech start-ups
and in leadership positions.
Trustworthy Technology: Dr Andrew Lensen (proposal lead), Prof Michael Winikoff, Prof Stephen Cranefield, Prof Brendan McCane, Prof Grant
Dick, A/Prof Hui Ma, Dr Emily O’Riordan, Dr Veronica Liesaputra, Dr Caitlin Owen
Trustworthy Frameworks: Prof Alexandra Andhov, Prof Nick Agar, Prof Ali Knott, A/Prof Stephen Hill, Dr Cassandra Mudgway, Dr Michael Daubs, Dr
Olivia J Erdelyi, Dr Ethan Plaut, Dr Andrew Richmond
Trustworthy Systems and Industry Expertise: Dr Andrew Chen, Chris McGavin, Paul Seiler (Catalyst Cloud), Deane Sloan (Equinox IT), Dave
Moskovitz, Prof David Eyers, Dr Heitor Gomes
Indigenous Māori AI Experts: Prof Hemi Whaanga, Dr Kirita-Rose Escott, Dr Jesse Pirini (Executive Chair of Te Matarau a Māui); Dr Kevin Shedlock,
and the wider Hiringa te Mahara team
RAISE will track outcomes in scientific excellence (e.g. publications and citations), commercialisation (e.g. start-ups created, capital raised), and
societal impact (e.g. public engagements, changes in public perceptions).
RAISE will be governed by a Board comprising a mix of academic, Māori, and industry members, providing accountability and oversight. We also
plan to establish a Research Board with international and Vision Mātauranga expertise to provide strategic direction for RAISE, and a Community
Advisory Board to inform the research work through engagement with relevant community groups. RAISE’s operational team will include Māori
co-leadership.

Connections
Our team has a strong track record of collaboration in both domestic and international AI research and industry networks, particularly in the areas
of AI trust and safety. We will leverage our positions in high-level international forums, including the OECD, the EU’s AI office, and the Global
Partnership on AI (GPAI), as well as relationships with prominent global researchers such as Prof Yoshua Bengio (University of Montréal), Prof
Shannon Vallor (BRAID), Prof Stuart Russell (UC Berkeley), and Prof Virginia Dignum (Umeå AI Policy Lab). This will create a pipeline of global
talent through visiting fellowships and funded positions, establishing RAISE as an enduring and world-class multidisciplinary RAI research
community.
Formal partnerships with the global network of AI Safety Institutes will further expand our international reach. NZ's scale and social cohesion
make it the ideal place to study the real-world societal impacts of AI deployment. RAISE's value proposition will be to serve as a world-leading
centre for sociotechnical evaluation, directly addressing the investment goal to "foster and grow international research and development", and
creating a high-value role for NZ in the global ecosystem.

Vision Mātauranga is woven into RAISE in partnership with the Hiringa Te Mahara Māori research team, whose expert collaboration spans global
indigenous communities, and Te Mataurau a Māui, a network of Māori businesses keen to test and trial AI. These networks will help RAISE
connect with iwi/hapū authorities, tribal NGOs, and Māori academics across Aotearoa. For Māori, responsible AI is critically important to the
sustainable development of the Māori economy, with wide-ranging benefits for the whole of NZ.
RAISE will build on existing relationships domestically with key industry bodies (e.g. AI Forum), research communities, and the innovation and
investment ecosystem to ensure research is commercially relevant and rapidly implemented. RAISE will play a vital role in catalysing industry as a
centralised hub for organisations to easily access NZ’s leading interdisciplinary AI experts.

Investing in People
RAISE will help cultivate the next generation of AI talent, ensuring they are both technically brilliant and socially and ethically literate. They will
be equipped with foundational, multidisciplinary skills that will be highly sought after as markets and technology continue to evolve, directly
supporting the government’s goal of building a “future-ready workforce”. There will be a focus on training master’s and doctoral students,
including through the applied doctorates scheme, to develop industry-ready expertise in RAI. Many members of this proposal are experienced
supervisors of interdisciplinary thesis students.
RAISE will also develop new interdisciplinary postgraduate coursework curricula. It will seek early engagement with strategic partners, such as
REANNZ, PROs, and industry partners, to ensure the curriculum meets the needs of the emerging AI workforce and secures preemptive buy-in.
This will create a pipeline of graduates with the unique, multidisciplinary skills required for the RAI economy. RAISE will also actively inform and
educate the New Zealand public about the safe use of AI, thereby addressing the knowledge and skills barriers that impede AI uptake, while
building public trust that enables businesses to deploy RAI confidently.
Some parts of this proposal were edited using Gemini and Perplexity GenAI tools.

Additional Information
Conflicts of Interest
Do you have one or more conflict of interests to declare?
Question
Do you have one or more conflict of interests to declare?

Please state who you are conflicted with, the type of conflict and a description of the conflict.

Answer(yes/no)
No

